How to help Dragora


%!includeconf: ../config.t2t

[< Back to home index.html]

These are general tips on how you can help Dragora.

=== Test releases ===

- Using the distribution in general terms or trying the latest test release
(when available) is always appreciated.


=== Development ===

- When the next version of Dragora is in development, you can check if the
TODO file is available (git repository) to see what is missing or what
needs to be done.

- You can browse the source code and check if something
can be improved, if you do not understand anything about programming, you
can contribute by detecting spelling mistakes in miscellaneous messages.

- You can help with ideas or by introducing something that is really
necessary.


=== Documentation ===

- The improvement of the FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions) and the
documentation in general about Dragora is always welcome.


=== Translations ===

- You can translate the website in your language.  The website is generated
using http://www.txt2tags.org.  Latest sources can be found on the git
repository under the "website" directory.

- You can help with the official manual and also help translate it to
other languages.  This is not just for you, it can benefit to anyone in the
world who is interested in the project.


=== Help others ===

If you are already a Dragora user and want to make your knowledge
available by helping other people, please use the available means of
communication.

=== Donations ===

This is one of the most important aspects to guarantee the continuity of
the project.  Please see the [donation donate.html] section.

=== Diffusion ===

Help spread the word and let Dragora be known everywhere.  The community
benefits from it!


--------------------

Send general questions or suggestions to the mailing list:
dragora-users@nongnu.org.


[^ Go up help.html#]''<BR>''
[< Back to home index.html]

%!include: ../footer.t2t

