Dragora Mirror List


%!includeconf: ../config.t2t

[< Back to home index.html]

== Mirror list ==

=== Global ===

- Global
  - http://sourceforge.net/projects/dragora/files (ISO images only)


=== North America ===

- USA
  - http://mirror.fsf.org/dragora
  - http://rsync.dragora.org
  - rsync://rsync.dragora.org/


=== South America ===

- Ecuador
  - http://mirror.cedia.org.ec/dragora
  - rsync://mirror.cedia.org.ec/dragora/


=== Asia ===

- Singapore
  - http://mirrors.standaloneinstaller.com/dragora/mirror/


== Mirror Setup ==

If there's no Dragora mirror near you, you're welcome to contribute one.
First, for users/downloaders: the address http://rsync.dragora.org/ contain
ISO images and distributed source code (in various compression formats).

Mirroring the Dragora server requires approximately 7.6GB disk space (as of April 2019).
You can rsync directly from rsync.dragora.org:

``rsync -rltpHS --delete-excluded rsync://rsync.dragora.org/ /your/dir/``

However, please consider mirroring from another site, again to reduce load
on the Dragora server.  The listed sites provide access to all the
material on rsync.dragora.org.  They update from us nightly (at least),
and you may access them via rsync with the same options as above.

//Note://

We keep a file called "timestamp" under the main tree after each
synchronization.  This file can be used to verify, instead of
synchronizing all the content at once, you can check if this file has
been updated and then continue with full synchronization.

== No warranty ==

We distribute software in the hope that it will be useful, but without any
warranty.  No author or distributor of this software accepts responsibility
to anyone for the consequences of using it or for whether it serves any
particular purpose or works at all, unless they say so in writing.  This
is exactly the same warranty that proprietary software companies offer:
none.


[^ Go up mirrors.html#]''<BR>''
[< Back to home index.html]

%!include: footer.t2t

